README.md, before:

# 🚀 Algorithms in Go

<div align="center">

![Go](https://img.shields.io/badge/go-%2300ADD8.svg?style=for-the-badge&logo=go&logoColor=white)
![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/JoaoVitor615/algorithms-in-go?style=for-the-badge)
![GitHub stars](https://img.shields.io/github/stars/JoaoVitor615/algorithms-in-go?style=for-the-badge)
![GitHub forks](https://img.shields.io/github/forks/JoaoVitor615/algorithms-in-go?style=for-the-badge)
![GitHub issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/JoaoVitor615/algorithms-in-go?style=for-the-badge)

**A comprehensive collection of algorithms and data structures implemented in Go**

[🔗 Explore the Code](#-algorithms-implemented) • [📖 Documentation](#-documentation) • [🛠️ Installation](#️-installation) • [🤝 Contributing](#-contributing)

</div>

---

## 📋 Table of Contents

- [📝 About](#-about)
- [🎯 Objectives](#-objectives)
- [🔗 Algorithms Implemented](#-algorithms-implemented)
- [🛠️ Installation](#️-installation)
- [🚀 Usage](#-usage)
- [🧪 Testing](#-testing)
- [📈 Performance Analysis](#-performance-analysis)
- [🤝 Contributing](#-contributing)
- [📄 License](#-license)
- [👨‍💻 Author](#-author)

---

## 📝 About

**Algorithms in Go** is an educational repository designed to help developers understand and implement fundamental algorithms and data structures using the Go programming language. This project serves as both a learning resource and a reference implementation for computer science concepts.

### 🌟 Why This Repository?

- **Educational Focus**: Clear, well-documented implementations perfect for learning
- **Production Ready**: Efficient algorithms with proper error handling
- **Test Coverage**: Comprehensive test suites ensuring reliability
- **Interactive Examples**: Terminal-based interfaces for hands-on experimentation
- **Community Driven**: Open for contributions and improvements

---

## 🎯 Objectives

This repository aims to:

- 📚 **Educate**: Provide clear implementations of fundamental algorithms
- 🔬 **Demonstrate**: Show Go language best practices and idiomatic code
- 🚀 **Inspire**: Encourage algorithmic thinking and problem-solving skills
- 🤝 **Build Community**: Foster collaboration among Go developers
- 📊 **Analyze**: Compare algorithm performance and complexity

---

## 🔗 Algorithms Implemented

<details>
<summary><strong>🔀 Sorting Algorithms</strong></summary>

| Algorithm | Time Complexity | Space Complexity | Stable | Status |
|-----------|----------------|------------------|--------|---------|
| **Merge Sort** | O(n log n) | O(n) | ✅ | ✅ Implemented |
| **Quick Sort** | O(n log n) avg, O(n²) worst | O(log n) | ❌ | ✅ Implemented |
| Heap Sort | O(n log n) | O(1) | ❌ | 🔄 Coming Soon |
| Bubble Sort | O(n²) | O(1) | ✅ | ✅ Implemented |
| Insertion Sort | O(n²) | O(1) | ✅ | 🔄 Coming Soon |

</details>

<details>
<summary><strong>🔍 Search Algorithms</strong></summary>

| Algorithm | Time Complexity | Space Complexity | Prerequisites | Status |
|-----------|----------------|------------------|---------------|---------|
| Binary Search | O(log n) | O(1) | Sorted Array | 🔄 Coming Soon |
| Linear Search | O(n) | O(1) | None | 🔄 Coming Soon |
| Depth-First Search (DFS) | O(V + E) | O(V) | Graph/Tree | 🔄 Coming Soon |
| Breadth-First Search (BFS) | O(V + E) | O(V) | Graph/Tree | 🔄 Coming Soon |

</details>

<details>
<summary><strong>🏗️ Data Structures</strong></summary>

| Structure | Average Access | Average Insert | Average Delete | Status |
|-----------|---------------|---------------|---------------|---------|
| Linked List | O(n) | O(1) | O(1) | ✅ Implemented |
| Stack | O(n) | O(1) | O(1) | 🔄 Coming Soon |
| Queue | O(n) | O(1) | O(1) | 🔄 Coming Soon |
| Binary Tree | O(log n) | O(log n) | O(log n) | 🔄 Coming Soon |
| Hash Table | O(1) | O(1) | O(1) | 🔄 Coming Soon |

</details>

<details>
<summary><strong>🔢 Dynamic Programming</strong></summary>

| Problem | Approach | Time Complexity | Status |
|---------|----------|----------------|---------|
| Fibonacci | Memoization | O(n) | 🔄 Coming Soon |
| Longest Common Subsequence | Bottom-up | O(mn) | 🔄 Coming Soon |
| Knapsack Problem | 2D DP | O(nW) | 🔄 Coming Soon |

</details>

---

## 🛠️ Installation

### Prerequisites

- **Go 1.24.3+** ([Download here](https://golang.org/dl/))
- **Git** for cloning the repository

### Quick Start

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/JoaoVitor615/algorithms-in-go.git

# Navigate to the project directory
cd algorithms-in-go

# Initialize Go modules (if needed)
go mod tidy

# Run the interactive terminal
go run main.go
```

### Alternative: Direct Package Usage

```bash
# Install as a Go module
go get github.com/JoaoVitor615/algorithms-in-go
```

---

## 🚀 Usage

### Interactive Terminal Mode

The repository includes an interactive terminal interface for hands-on experimentation:

```bash
go run main.go
```

**Sample Output:**
```
Welcome to the Algorithms-in-Go Terminal! 🚀
Please choose a category to execute:
1. Sorting Algorithms
2. Search Algorithms (Coming Soon)
3. Data Structures (Coming Soon)
4. Dynamic Programming (Coming Soon)

Enter your choice: 1

[   Sorting Algorithms - Advanced Testing   ]
Choose a sorting algorithm:

1. Merge Sort
2. Quick Sort
3. Heap Sort (Coming Soon)
4. Bubble Sort (Coming Soon)
5. Insertion Sort (Coming Soon)
6. Back to main menu

Enter your choice (1-6): 1
```

### Sorting Algorithms Example

```go
package main

import (
    "fmt"
    "github.com/JoaoVitor615/algorithms-in-go/sorting/merge_sort"
    "github.com/JoaoVitor615/algorithms-in-go/sorting/quick_sort"
)

func main() {
    // Create a linked list: 64 -> 34 -> 25 -> 12 -> nil
    head := &merge_sort.Node{Value: 64}
    head.Next = &merge_sort.Node{Value: 34}
    head.Next.Next = &merge_sort.Node{Value: 25}
    head.Next.Next.Next = &merge_sort.Node{Value: 12}

    fmt.Println("Original List:")
    printList(head) // Output: 64 -> 34 -> 25 -> 12 -> nil

    // Sort the list using Merge Sort (Linked Lists)
    sortedHead := merge_sort.MergeSort(head)

    fmt.Println("Sorted List (Merge Sort):")
    printList(sortedHead) // Output: 12 -> 25 -> 34 -> 64 -> nil
    
    // Sort an array using Quick Sort
    arr := []int{64, 34, 25, 12, 22, 11, 90}
    sortedArr := quick_sort.QuickSort(arr)
    
    fmt.Println("Sorted Array (Quick Sort):")
    fmt.Println(sortedArr) // Output: [11 12 22 25 34 64 90]
}

func printList(node *merge_sort.Node) {
    for node != nil {
        fmt.Printf("%d -> ", node.Value)
        node = node.Next
    }
    fmt.Println("nil")
}
```

### Advanced Testing Interface

The project includes an advanced testing interface with multiple options:

```go
package main

import "github.com/JoaoVitor615/algorithms-in-go/sorting"

func main() {
    // Launch sorting algorithms interface
    sorting.RunSortingInterface()
}
```

**Available Testing Options:**
1. **Manual Input** - Enter numbers manually
2. **Custom Random** - Generate 1 to 1,000,000 random numbers
3. **Benchmark 500** - Test with 500 random numbers
4. **Benchmark 1,000** - Test with 1,000 random numbers  
5. **Benchmark 5,000** - Test with 5,000 random numbers
6. **Benchmark 10,000** - Test with 10,000 random numbers
7. **Run All Benchmarks** - Complete performance analysis
8. **Back to Menu** - Return to algorithm selection

### Using Individual Algorithms

```go
import "github.com/JoaoVitor615/algorithms-in-go/sorting/merge_sort"

// Use any sorting algorithm directly
sortedList := merge_sort.MergeSort(yourLinkedList)
```

---

## 🧪 Testing

Run comprehensive tests to ensure algorithm correctness:

```bash
# Run all tests
go test ./...

# Run tests with coverage
go test -cover ./...

# Run tests with detailed coverage report
go test -coverprofile=coverage.out ./... && go tool cover -html=coverage.out

# Run specific package tests
go test ./sorting/merge_sort -v
```

**Current Test Coverage:**
- **MergeSort**: 43.3% coverage with comprehensive edge case testing

**Test Cases Include:**
- ✅ Empty lists
- ✅ Single element lists
- ✅ Already sorted lists
- ✅ Reverse sorted lists
- ✅ Lists with duplicate elements
- ✅ Lists with even/odd number of elements

---

## 📈 Performance Analysis

### Merge Sort Performance

| Input Size | Time Complexity | Space Complexity | Performance |
|------------|----------------|------------------|-------------|
| n = 100 | O(n log n) | O(n) | ~0.001s |
| n = 1,000 | O(n log n) | O(n) | ~0.01s |
| n = 10,000 | O(n log n) | O(n) | ~0.1s |
| n = 100,000 | O(n log n) | O(n) | ~1s |

**Benchmarking:**
```bash
# Run performance benchmarks
go test -bench=. ./sorting/merge_sort
```

---

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions from the community! Here's how you can help:

### 🔧 Areas for Contribution

- **New Algorithms**: Implement additional sorting, searching, or graph algorithms
- **Optimization**: Improve existing algorithm performance
- **Documentation**: Enhance code comments and README sections
- **Testing**: Add more comprehensive test cases
- **Visualization**: Create graphical representations of algorithms

### 📋 Contribution Guidelines

1. **Fork** the repository
2. **Create** a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-algorithm`)
3. **Follow** Go conventions and add comprehensive tests
4. **Document** your code with clear comments
5. **Test** your implementation (`go test ./...`)
6. **Commit** your changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing algorithm'`)
7. **Push** to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-algorithm`)
8. **Open** a Pull Request

### 💡 Algorithm Implementation Template

```go
package youralgorithm

// YourAlgorithm implements [brief description]
// Time Complexity: O(?)
// Space Complexity: O(?)
func YourAlgorithm(input []int) []int {
    // Implementation here
}

// Helper functions
func helper() {
    // Helper implementation
}
```

---

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the **MIT License** - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

```
MIT License

Copyright (c) 2025 JoaoVitor615

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy...
```

---

## 👨‍💻 Author

<div align="center">

### **João Vitor** 


**Passionate Go Developer  | Open Source Contributor**

[![LinkedIn](https://img.shields.io/badge/LinkedIn-0077B5?style=for-the-badge&logo=linkedin&logoColor=white)](https://www.linkedin.com/in/jvboaventura/)
[![GitHub](https://img.shields.io/badge/GitHub-100000?style=for-the-badge&logo=github&logoColor=white)](https://github.com/JoaoVitor615)

</div>



### 🚀 Let's Connect!

I'm always excited to discuss algorithms, Go programming, and software engineering. Feel free to:

- 💬 **Ask questions** about implementations
- 🤝 **Collaborate** on new algorithms
- 📈 **Share** performance optimization ideas
- 🌟 **Star** this repository if it helps you!

---

<div align="center">

### ⭐ If this project helped you, please give it a star!

**Made with ❤️ and lots of ☕ by [JoaoVitor615](https://github.com/JoaoVitor615)**


</div>

Commit message:

Update README with explanation of unstable sorting
Clarify the definition of unstable sorting algorithms.

README.md, after:

# 🚀 Algorithms in Go

<div align="center">

![Go](https://img.shields.io/badge/go-%2300ADD8.svg?style=for-the-badge&logo=go&logoColor=white)
![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/JoaoVitor615/algorithms-in-go?style=for-the-badge)
![GitHub stars](https://img.shields.io/github/stars/JoaoVitor615/algorithms-in-go?style=for-the-badge)
![GitHub forks](https://img.shields.io/github/forks/JoaoVitor615/algorithms-in-go?style=for-the-badge)
![GitHub issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/JoaoVitor615/algorithms-in-go?style=for-the-badge)

**A comprehensive collection of algorithms and data structures implemented in Go**

[🔗 Explore the Code](#-algorithms-implemented) • [📖 Documentation](#-documentation) • [🛠️ Installation](#️-installation) • [🤝 Contributing](#-contributing)

</div>

---

## 📋 Table of Contents

- [📝 About](#-about)
- [🎯 Objectives](#-objectives)
- [🔗 Algorithms Implemented](#-algorithms-implemented)
- [🛠️ Installation](#️-installation)
- [🚀 Usage](#-usage)
- [🧪 Testing](#-testing)
- [📈 Performance Analysis](#-performance-analysis)
- [🤝 Contributing](#-contributing)
- [📄 License](#-license)
- [👨‍💻 Author](#-author)

---

## 📝 About

**Algorithms in Go** is an educational repository designed to help developers understand and implement fundamental algorithms and data structures using the Go programming language. This project serves as both a learning resource and a reference implementation for computer science concepts.

### 🌟 Why This Repository?

- **Educational Focus**: Clear, well-documented implementations perfect for learning
- **Production Ready**: Efficient algorithms with proper error handling
- **Test Coverage**: Comprehensive test suites ensuring reliability
- **Interactive Examples**: Terminal-based interfaces for hands-on experimentation
- **Community Driven**: Open for contributions and improvements

---

## 🎯 Objectives

This repository aims to:

- 📚 **Educate**: Provide clear implementations of fundamental algorithms
- 🔬 **Demonstrate**: Show Go language best practices and idiomatic code
- 🚀 **Inspire**: Encourage algorithmic thinking and problem-solving skills
- 🤝 **Build Community**: Foster collaboration among Go developers
- 📊 **Analyze**: Compare algorithm performance and complexity

---

## 🔗 Algorithms Implemented

<details>
<summary><strong>🔀 Sorting Algorithms</strong></summary>

| Algorithm | Time Complexity | Space Complexity | Stable | Status |
|-----------|----------------|------------------|--------|---------|
| **Merge Sort** | O(n log n) | O(n) | ✅ | ✅ Implemented |
| **Quick Sort** | O(n log n) avg, O(n²) worst | O(log n) | ❌ | ✅ Implemented |
| Heap Sort | O(n log n) | O(1) | ❌ | 🔄 Coming Soon |
| Bubble Sort | O(n²) | O(1) | ✅ | ✅ Implemented |
| Insertion Sort | O(n²) | O(1) | ✅ | 🔄 Coming Soon |

</details>

<details>
<summary><strong>🔍 Search Algorithms</strong></summary>

| Algorithm | Time Complexity | Space Complexity | Prerequisites | Status |
|-----------|----------------|------------------|---------------|---------|
| Binary Search | O(log n) | O(1) | Sorted Array | 🔄 Coming Soon |
| Linear Search | O(n) | O(1) | None | 🔄 Coming Soon |
| Depth-First Search (DFS) | O(V + E) | O(V) | Graph/Tree | 🔄 Coming Soon |
| Breadth-First Search (BFS) | O(V + E) | O(V) | Graph/Tree | 🔄 Coming Soon |

</details>

<details>
<summary><strong>🏗️ Data Structures</strong></summary>

| Structure | Average Access | Average Insert | Average Delete | Status |
|-----------|---------------|---------------|---------------|---------|
| Linked List | O(n) | O(1) | O(1) | ✅ Implemented |
| Stack | O(n) | O(1) | O(1) | 🔄 Coming Soon |
| Queue | O(n) | O(1) | O(1) | 🔄 Coming Soon |
| Binary Tree | O(log n) | O(log n) | O(log n) | 🔄 Coming Soon |
| Hash Table | O(1) | O(1) | O(1) | 🔄 Coming Soon |

</details>

<details>
<summary><strong>🔢 Dynamic Programming</strong></summary>

| Problem | Approach | Time Complexity | Status |
|---------|----------|----------------|---------|
| Fibonacci | Memoization | O(n) | 🔄 Coming Soon |
| Longest Common Subsequence | Bottom-up | O(mn) | 🔄 Coming Soon |
| Knapsack Problem | 2D DP | O(nW) | 🔄 Coming Soon |

</details>

> **What's an unstable sorting algorithm?**
>
> An algorithm that's considered unstable means that the algorithm doesn't guarantee the same order of the elements of each sorting.
>
> For example, in this array: [1, 1, 2, 3].
> 
> An unstable sorting algorithm doesn't guarantee that the ones in the beggining will be always in the same order. Obviously, it just matters in specefic cases where you need to preserve the order of theese elements. 

---

## 🛠️ Installation

### Prerequisites

- **Go 1.24.3+** ([Download here](https://golang.org/dl/))
- **Git** for cloning the repository

### Quick Start

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/JoaoVitor615/algorithms-in-go.git

# Navigate to the project directory
cd algorithms-in-go

# Initialize Go modules (if needed)
go mod tidy

# Run the interactive terminal
go run main.go
```

### Alternative: Direct Package Usage

```bash
# Install as a Go module
go get github.com/JoaoVitor615/algorithms-in-go
```

---

## 🚀 Usage

### Interactive Terminal Mode

The repository includes an interactive terminal interface for hands-on experimentation:

```bash
go run main.go
```

**Sample Output:**
```
Welcome to the Algorithms-in-Go Terminal! 🚀
Please choose a category to execute:
1. Sorting Algorithms
2. Search Algorithms (Coming Soon)
3. Data Structures (Coming Soon)
4. Dynamic Programming (Coming Soon)

Enter your choice: 1

[   Sorting Algorithms - Advanced Testing   ]
Choose a sorting algorithm:

1. Merge Sort
2. Quick Sort
3. Heap Sort (Coming Soon)
4. Bubble Sort (Coming Soon)
5. Insertion Sort (Coming Soon)
6. Back to main menu

Enter your choice (1-6): 1
```

### Sorting Algorithms Example

```go
package main

import (
    "fmt"
    "github.com/JoaoVitor615/algorithms-in-go/sorting/merge_sort"
    "github.com/JoaoVitor615/algorithms-in-go/sorting/quick_sort"
)

func main() {
    // Create a linked list: 64 -> 34 -> 25 -> 12 -> nil
    head := &merge_sort.Node{Value: 64}
    head.Next = &merge_sort.Node{Value: 34}
    head.Next.Next = &merge_sort.Node{Value: 25}
    head.Next.Next.Next = &merge_sort.Node{Value: 12}

    fmt.Println("Original List:")
    printList(head) // Output: 64 -> 34 -> 25 -> 12 -> nil

    // Sort the list using Merge Sort (Linked Lists)
    sortedHead := merge_sort.MergeSort(head)

    fmt.Println("Sorted List (Merge Sort):")
    printList(sortedHead) // Output: 12 -> 25 -> 34 -> 64 -> nil
    
    // Sort an array using Quick Sort
    arr := []int{64, 34, 25, 12, 22, 11, 90}
    sortedArr := quick_sort.QuickSort(arr)
    
    fmt.Println("Sorted Array (Quick Sort):")
    fmt.Println(sortedArr) // Output: [11 12 22 25 34 64 90]
}

func printList(node *merge_sort.Node) {
    for node != nil {
        fmt.Printf("%d -> ", node.Value)
        node = node.Next
    }
    fmt.Println("nil")
}
```

### Advanced Testing Interface

The project includes an advanced testing interface with multiple options:

```go
package main

import "github.com/JoaoVitor615/algorithms-in-go/sorting"

func main() {
    // Launch sorting algorithms interface
    sorting.RunSortingInterface()
}
```

**Available Testing Options:**
1. **Manual Input** - Enter numbers manually
2. **Custom Random** - Generate 1 to 1,000,000 random numbers
3. **Benchmark 500** - Test with 500 random numbers
4. **Benchmark 1,000** - Test with 1,000 random numbers  
5. **Benchmark 5,000** - Test with 5,000 random numbers
6. **Benchmark 10,000** - Test with 10,000 random numbers
7. **Run All Benchmarks** - Complete performance analysis
8. **Back to Menu** - Return to algorithm selection

### Using Individual Algorithms

```go
import "github.com/JoaoVitor615/algorithms-in-go/sorting/merge_sort"

// Use any sorting algorithm directly
sortedList := merge_sort.MergeSort(yourLinkedList)
```

---

## 🧪 Testing

Run comprehensive tests to ensure algorithm correctness:

```bash
# Run all tests
go test ./...

# Run tests with coverage
go test -cover ./...

# Run tests with detailed coverage report
go test -coverprofile=coverage.out ./... && go tool cover -html=coverage.out

# Run specific package tests
go test ./sorting/merge_sort -v
```

**Current Test Coverage:**
- **MergeSort**: 43.3% coverage with comprehensive edge case testing

**Test Cases Include:**
- ✅ Empty lists
- ✅ Single element lists
- ✅ Already sorted lists
- ✅ Reverse sorted lists
- ✅ Lists with duplicate elements
- ✅ Lists with even/odd number of elements

---

## 📈 Performance Analysis

### Merge Sort Performance

| Input Size | Time Complexity | Space Complexity | Performance |
|------------|----------------|------------------|-------------|
| n = 100 | O(n log n) | O(n) | ~0.001s |
| n = 1,000 | O(n log n) | O(n) | ~0.01s |
| n = 10,000 | O(n log n) | O(n) | ~0.1s |
| n = 100,000 | O(n log n) | O(n) | ~1s |

**Benchmarking:**
```bash
# Run performance benchmarks
go test -bench=. ./sorting/merge_sort
```

---

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions from the community! Here's how you can help:

### 🔧 Areas for Contribution

- **New Algorithms**: Implement additional sorting, searching, or graph algorithms
- **Optimization**: Improve existing algorithm performance
- **Documentation**: Enhance code comments and README sections
- **Testing**: Add more comprehensive test cases
- **Visualization**: Create graphical representations of algorithms

### 📋 Contribution Guidelines

1. **Fork** the repository
2. **Create** a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-algorithm`)
3. **Follow** Go conventions and add comprehensive tests
4. **Document** your code with clear comments
5. **Test** your implementation (`go test ./...`)
6. **Commit** your changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing algorithm'`)
7. **Push** to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-algorithm`)
8. **Open** a Pull Request

### 💡 Algorithm Implementation Template

```go
package youralgorithm

// YourAlgorithm implements [brief description]
// Time Complexity: O(?)
// Space Complexity: O(?)
func YourAlgorithm(input []int) []int {
    // Implementation here
}

// Helper functions
func helper() {
    // Helper implementation
}
```

---

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the **MIT License** - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

```
MIT License

Copyright (c) 2025 JoaoVitor615

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy...
```

---

## 👨‍💻 Author

<div align="center">

### **João Vitor** 


**Passionate Go Developer  | Open Source Contributor**

[![LinkedIn](https://img.shields.io/badge/LinkedIn-0077B5?style=for-the-badge&logo=linkedin&logoColor=white)](https://www.linkedin.com/in/jvboaventura/)
[![GitHub](https://img.shields.io/badge/GitHub-100000?style=for-the-badge&logo=github&logoColor=white)](https://github.com/JoaoVitor615)

</div>



### 🚀 Let's Connect!

I'm always excited to discuss algorithms, Go programming, and software engineering. Feel free to:

- 💬 **Ask questions** about implementations
- 🤝 **Collaborate** on new algorithms
- 📈 **Share** performance optimization ideas
- 🌟 **Star** this repository if it helps you!

---

<div align="center">

### ⭐ If this project helped you, please give it a star!

**Made with ❤️ and lots of ☕ by [JoaoVitor615](https://github.com/JoaoVitor615)**


</div>
